---
layout: default
title: About
---
<h2 id="intro">About the author and this site</h2>

<div class="post">
h1. The Author

My name is Navin.  I live in Sydney, Australia.  I am a recent ruby enthusiast and am happily curious about where this might take me. 

I have been around the block a few times, and live(d) a few very different lives.  These include:
* C Programmer 
* Research mathematician and teacher
* Bioinformatics groupie
* PKI, Identity and Trust afficionado
* Information security architect and consultant
* Senior manager at a consulting firm and at a financial institution

I like to learn - really a lot.  

h1. The Site

I write here.  Topics include information and opinion relevant to my adventures as a technologist. I will not publish anything here of a personal nature.

As a result of my recent forays into development, I decided to build this site using ruby and other open-source tools.  I conciously decided not to use tumblr or posterous or similar ... and to see whether I can get to a point where I don't notice any productivity blocks resulting from "blogging like a hacker."  

So, I have chosen to have this site hosted on "GitHub":http://github.com using their "Pages":http://github.com/blog/272-github-pages feature.  The site is created using "Tom Preston-Werner's":http://tom.preston-werner.com/ excellent "Jekyll":http://jekyllrb.com static site generator. I get to write in textile or markdown, learn about design as I tweak the layout of the site, and, store everything in Git, a version control system that I am getting to know well.  I will (if I haven't already) write about how I set up this site, and what services and tools play here.  So far, I've got a font I like from "Typekit":http://typekit.com and I am going to use "Disqus":http://disqus.com if I decide to enable comments. 

I used "Alex Payne's":http://al3x.net site as a starting point - I like the simplicity of its structure, style and appearance.  I have also borrowed ideas (and had a peek at how these were implemented) from various other jekyll powered sites on Github pages.

h3. License

All original textual content is licensed under the "Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 2.5 Australia License":http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/au/.

h1. Elsewhere

You can find me on a variety of social web sites; my username is usually "novemberkilo". Alphabetically:

* "Flickr":http://www.flickr.com/photos/navink/ -- my photography.
* "GitHub":http://github.com/novemberkilo -- code, waiting for you to improve it.
* "Twitter":http://twitter.com/novemberkilo -- telegraphic updates and observations.

h1. Contact

Feel free to email me. <a href="mailto:navin@novemberkilo.com">navin@novemberkilo.com</a>. 
</div>
